Zika virus risk low on P.E.I., says chief health officer
'This is not something that is transmitted from me to you, from person to person,' says Heather Morrison
The risk of contracting the Zika virus on P.E.I. is very low, says the province's chief public health officer.The mosquito-borne Zika virus is drawing global attention due to its rapid spread and possible connection to a rare neurological birth defect. It is spread by mosquitoes not native to Canada.Zika virus: 6 things to know about the growing outbreakZika virus outbreak 'spreading explosively': WHO"It's really important for the public to know this is not something that is transmitted from me to you, from person to person. That's not how you get ill," said Dr. Heather Morrison.P.E.I. Chief Public Health Officer Dr. Heather Morrison says the risk of contracting the Zika virus on the Island is very low. (CBC)"It's from the mosquito, an infected mosquito that bites you and that's when you can get the virus. And the only transmission really that can occur is a mother to a child if you are pregnant."Morrison advises pregnant women to rethink traveling to countries where the virus is prevalent, such as those in Central and South America and the Caribbean.There have been travel-related cases of Zika virus reported in Canada in travellers returning from countries where the virus is known to circulate, Health Canada states on its website.Three cases have been reported in Canada among people who've travelled to affected areas. The virus has been transmitted in 21 countries so far.Experts are investigating a possible link between Zika infection in pregnant women and infants with severe birth defects.Morrison stressed that there's no need to worry about someone who has been in one of those countries returning home and infecting others.Health officials on P.E.I. will be monitoring the situation, and doctors will be on the lookout for those who may have come back from an infected area and have symptoms of the virus.Symptoms include fever, headache, red eyes, rash or muscle pain. Illness is typically mild and lasts only a few days, Health Canada said.There are no medications or treatments for the virus.