Zika virus: President Obama calls for urgent action
US President Barack Obama has called for urgent action against the Zika virus, which has been linked to babies being born with underdeveloped brains. He said research to develop vaccines and treatments must be speeded up. The World Health Organization says the virus is likely to spread across nearly all of the Americas. It has already been found in 21 countries in the Caribbean, North and South America. Symptoms include mild fever, conjunctivitis and headache.  Medics are most worried about the damage the virus can potentially cause to babies in the womb. Brazil has recorded a huge spike in cases of microcephaly - the condition where babies are born with unusually small heads - and a number of Central and South American nations have asked women to delay pregnancy. There have been 3,893 reported cases of microcephaly in Brazil since October compared with the previous annual average of just 160 cases. Elsewhere: Zika: What you need to know Zika virus 'to spread across Americas' Mothers' fears amid outbreak  'The worst day of my life' The alarming threat of Zika virus "The president emphasised the need to accelerate research efforts to make available better diagnostic tests, to develop vaccines and therapeutics, and to ensure that all Americans have information about the Zika virus," the White House said in a statement. Mr Obama was briefed on the potential spread of the virus by senior officials on Tuesday, with one recent study suggesting that the virus may affect regions where 60% of the US population lives. His spokesman said it was imperative for all Americans to have information about the virus and measures they can take to protect themselves. US National Institutes of Health Director Dr Francis Collins cited a Lancet study earlier this month in which researchers warned the virus could spread in warmer months along areas of the east and west coasts of the US and much of the Midwest, where about 200 million people live. The study also shows that nearly 23 million more people live in humid parts of the US where mosquitoes carrying the virus can survive all year round. "It is now critically important to confirm, through careful epidemiological and animal studies, whether or not a causal link exists between Zika virus infections in pregnant women and microcephaly in their newborn babies,"  Dr Collins said. Brazil's government on Tuesday said it would deploy 220,000 soldiers in its fight against the virus. They will go from home to home handing out leaflets on how to avoid its spread.  The announcement came after Health Minister Marcelo Castro said Brazil was "losing badly" in its fight against the virus. Has the travel advice to stay away from South America if you are pregnant or trying to start a family put you off visiting the region? Have you cancelled any travel plans? Email your thoughts to haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk If you are willing to speak further to a BBC journalist, please include a contact telephone number, or you can WhatsApp us on +44 7525 900971. Or comment here: If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can
                        contact you on. In some cases a selection of your comments will be published, displaying your name as
                        you provide it and location, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published.
                        When sending us pictures, video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others,
                        take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws. Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions. Terms and conditions 